feat: Add Vaadin 23 Portlet documentation (#1358)
vaadin/docs: articles/flow/integrations/portlet/inter-portlet-communication.asciidoc

---
title: Inter-portlet Communication
order: 4

> description: Outlines how the reader can enable their Portlets to communicate with other Portlets (be they Vaadin Portlets or not) on the Portal page

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Describes how to enable Portlets to communicate with other Portlets (Vaadin or non-Vaadin) on the Portal page
```

layout: page
page-links:
  - https://github.com/vaadin/portlet[GitHub]
---

= Inter-portlet Communication

Inter-portlet communication (IPC) is a collection of methods which allow portlets to pass information from one to another.
This allows the separate portlets to work in a cohort to provide a cohesive whole.

> In Portlet 1.0 specification, portlet could only pass information via public request parameters; one portlet would create a request URL with request parameters that held the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Portlet 1.0 specification, a portlet could only pass information via public request parameters; one portlet would create a request URL with request parameters that held the data.
```

When the request was made, the handling portlet would receive those parameters and thus the data via the request.

> Portlet 2.0 specification introduced events; an event is defined in the portlet.xml with the associated parameter types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Portlet 2.0 specification introduced events; an event is defined in the [filename]#portlet.xml# with the associated parameter types.
```

A portlet may dispatch an event, and portlets which have registered to handle events with certain names will process the dispatched event.

> This form of IPC happens entirely on the server-side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This form of IPC happens entirely on the server side.
```

> Portlet 3.0 specification brings `PortletHub` - a client-side API for portlets to use for various tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Portlet 3.0 specification brings `PortletHub`, a client-side API for portlets to use for various tasks.
```

One aspect of this is firing client-side events and creating action requests to the server-side portlets.

> Vaadin Portlets allows the developer to leverage the latest Portlet 3.0 style IPC and provides helper APIs for common use-cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vaadin Portlets allows the developer to leverage the latest Portlet 3.0-style IPC and provides helper APIs for common use cases.
```

== Vaadin Portlet IPC with 3.0 Specification

> When Vaadin Portlets run on a portal supporting Portlet 3.0 specification, Vaadin Portlet automatically adds `PortletHub` support on the client-side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Vaadin Portlets run on a portal supporting the Portlet 3.0 specification, Vaadin Portlet automatically adds `PortletHub` support on the client side.
```

The standard IPC for Vaadin Portlets leverages `PortletHub` to provide the developer with seamless integration of the client-side and server-side events.

> You can use `PortletViewContext` to send events from your portlet's view class.
> These events are then delivered to the client-side, where the events are delivered forward using `PortletHub::dispatchClientEvent()`.
> To handle the events dispatched by the `PortletHub` you can either register your portlet's view class to handle certain events based on the event names, or register a JavaScript event handler onto the client-side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use [classname]`PortletViewContext` to send events from your portlet's view class.
These events are then delivered to the client side, where the events are delivered forward using [methodname]`PortletHub::dispatchClientEvent()`.
To handle the events dispatched by the [classname]`PortletHub` you can either register your portlet's view class to handle certain events based on the event names, or register a JavaScript event handler on the client side.
```

=== Firing and Receiving Events in Java Code

Given two portlet views `FiringPortletView` and `ReceivingPortletView` we setup our Vaadin Portlet IPC as follows:

.FiringPortletView.java
[source,java]
----
public class FiringPortletView extends Div implements PortletView {

    private PortletViewContext portletContext;

    @Override
    public void onPortletViewContextInit(PortletViewContext context) {
        portletContext = context;

        Button button = new Button("Fire event", event -> portletContext
                .fireEvent("my-ipc-event", Collections.emptyMap()));
    }
}
----

.ReceivingPortletView.java
[source,java]
----
public class ReceivingPortletView extends Div
        implements PortletView {

    @Override
    public void onPortletViewContextInit(PortletViewContext context) {
        context.addEventChangeListener("my-ipc-event", event -> Notification
                .show("Received '" + event.getEventName() + "' event!"));
    }
}
----

> `FiringPortletView.java` implements `PortletView` interface which allows it to get `PortletViewContext` when it is initialized.
> Then the button click listener calls `PortletViewContext::fireEvent(...)` method to fire our event. `ReceivingPortletView.java` also implements `PortletView` interface, which allows it to add event listeners via `PortletViewContext::addEventChangeListener` when it is initialized.
> When adding an event listener, we can specify the event name for which we'd like to receive updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[classname]`FiringPortletView.java` implements the [interfacename]`PortletView` interface, which allows it to get [classname]`PortletViewContext` when it is initialized.
The button-click listener then calls the [methodname]`PortletViewContext::fireEvent(...)` method to fire our event. [classname]`ReceivingPortletView.java` also implements the [interfacename]`PortletView` interface, which allows it to add event listeners via [methodname]`PortletViewContext::addEventChangeListener()` when it is initialized.
When adding an event listener, we can specify the event name for which we would like to receive updates.
```

> Events are fired using the `PortletHub` delivery method.
> Using `PortletHub` for IPC has the following benefits over the older Portlet 2.0 event mechanism:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Events are fired using the [classname]`PortletHub` delivery method.
Using [classname]`PortletHub` for IPC has the following benefits over the older Portlet 2.0 event mechanism:
```

> - Non-Vaadin portlets may receive these events on the client-side just as easily.
> - Firing these events does not require the code to be executed inside a portlet request.
> - These events do not need to be registered into the portlet.xml or defined using the 3.0 specification annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Non-Vaadin portlets may receive these events on the client side just as easily.
- Firing these events does not require the code to be executed inside a portlet request.
- These events do not need to be registered into the [filename]#portlet.xml# or defined using the 3.0 specification annotations.
```

[NOTE]

> Vaadin Portlet IPC API does not support Portlet 2.0 style event handling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Vaadin Portlet IPC API does not support Portlet 2.0-style event handling.
```
